Add Resource Drivers section  to extending Kubernetes documentation (#43742)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/resource-drivers.md

Reviewer: I recommend updating https://k8s.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/ to link to this new page.

---
title: DRA Resource Drivers
description: Resource drivers provide non-trivial allocation logic and management for devices or resources that require vendor-specific or just complex setup, such as GPUs, NICs, FPGAs, etc.
content_type: concept
weight: 10
---

<!-- overview -->
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.27" state="alpha" >}}

Kubernetes provides a
[Dynamic Resource Allocation](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/) (DRA)

> mechanism, that can be leveraged to provide more complex hardware resources to workloads with custom
> resource accounting.
> 

Reviewer: Try this:
```suggestion
mechanism, that can be leveraged to provide hardware resources to workloads with custom
resource accounting.

Dynamic resource allocation is an API for requesting and sharing resources between pods and containers inside a pod. It is a generalization of the persistent volumes API for generic resources. Third-party resource drivers are responsible for tracking and allocating resources. Different kinds of resources support arbitrary parameters for defining requirements and initialization.

## Comparison with device plugins

```

into the cluster to account for and control the allocation of GPUs, high-performance NICs, FPGAs,
InfiniBand adapters, and other similar computing resources that may require vendor specific
initialization and setup.

With device plugins, the scheduler was given a trivial, numerical representation of the resources
available on a node for consideration during scheduling as an extended resource.

With DRA, the scheduler is offloading the task of allocating and accounting for non-native resources
to the resource driver, which manages such resources in the cluster.

A resource driver consists of two main components:

- a _controller_ (one per cluster), manages hardware resources allocation for
  {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="ResourceClaim" text="ResourceClaims">}}
- _kubelet plugin_ (one per node that has or can access the associated resource), that:
  - discovers the supported hardware
  - announces the discovered hardware to the resource driver controller
  - prepares the hardware allocated to a ResourceClaim when the Kubelet prepares to create the Pod
  - unprepares the hardware allocated for a Pod when the Pod has reached final state or is being deleted.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Communication between kubelet plugins and controllers {#resource-driver-communication}

```

There are two common ways of communication between the controller and a kubelet plugin:

- through custom resource objects that use
  {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CustomResourceDefinitions">}}
 provided by the vendor or project behind the resource driver

> - through a ResourceHandle which is a part of an `AllocationResult` provided by the controller in case of
>   successful allocation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- through a `ResourceHandle` that is a part of an `AllocationResult` provided by the controller in case of
```

called again until suitable node is found.

When at least one Node is found to be suitable for all ResourceClaims, the scheduler
considers the suitable nodes for the other Pod scheduling constraints (native resources
requests, affinity, selectors, etc.), and picks up exactly one Node name.

After the Node was selected, the controller helper code will invoke _Allocate_ call of the Driver
to do the actual resource allocation for needed ResourceClaims on selected Node.

If Allocate call returns error for any number of ResourceClaims, the helper code will repeat the
same call with interval until it succeeds.

### Immediate allocation

Immediate allocation does not have selected node, and it is up to the resource driver controller
to select the best suitable node based on the ResourceClaim, ResourceClass and their parameters.
Therefore in this scenario only `Allocate` is called by the helper library, without `UnsupportedNodes`
being called first.

### Common calls for both allocation modes

In both modes the allocation is preceded by getting parameters objects for ResourceClaims and
ResourceClasses to ensure the resource driver is able to get these objects and understand them.

> ## Sharing resources

Reviewer: I'd move this section much earlier in the page.

    app: pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: container1
    image: ubuntu:22.04
    command: ["bash", "-c"]
    args: ["export; sleep 9999"]
    resources:
      claims:
      - name: gpus
  resourceClaims:
  - name: gpus
    source:
      resourceClaimTemplateName: gpu-test
# This Pod wants to use ResourceClaim gpu-test that needs 1 device of ResourceClass
# gpu.example.com, handled by the gpu.resource.example.com resource driver.
#
# The resource driver allocates the resources required for that ResourceClaim and ensures that these are
# ready to use, only then the Pod will start.
```

## Good practice for resource driver deployment {#resource-driver-deploy-tips}

The recommended way to deploy a resource driver is a Deployment for controller part and a DaemonSet
for the kubelet plugin part. It is also possible to deploy it as a package for your node's
operating system, or manually.

The kubelet uses a gRPC interface to interact with a resource driver's kubelet plugin. On the Kubernetes side,
no special permissions are required for resource drivers.

When you deploy a resource driver, you typically also define at least one ResourceClass using that driver.

## API compatibility

> Kubernetes Dynamic Resource Allocation support is in alpha. The API may change before stabilization,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes dynamic resource allocation support is in alpha. The API may change before stabilization,
```

---
title: DRA Resource Drivers
description: Resource drivers provide non-trivial allocation logic and management for devices or resources that require vendor-specific or just complex setup, such as GPUs, NICs, FPGAs, etc.
content_type: concept
weight: 10
---

<!-- overview -->

> {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.26" state="alpha" >}}

Reviewer 2: Is the specified feature state _(Kubernetes v1.26 [alpha])_  accurate as mentioned here? I noticed on another page ([Dynamic Resource Allocation page](https://kubernetes.io//docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/)), which is also referenced in the content below, that the state is indicated as _(Kubernetes v1.27 [alpha])_.

Author: The feature was in fact added in 1.26:
```bash
$ git log v1.26.0 | grep -B4 "kube features: add DynamicResourceAllocation"
commit 155d49813f131a2beb6aeef71270f94b6f5fcf18
Author: Patrick Ohly <patrick.ohly@intel.com>
Date:   Tue Mar 22 16:53:58 2022 +0100

    kube features: add DynamicResourceAllocation
```
But, 1.27 had backwards-incompatible API change, I guess that was the reason to name it as 1.27 in the other page. I'll make it 1.27 here too for consistency.

Author: Force-pushed squashed commmits.

Reviewer: `{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.26" state="alpha" >}}` sounds correct. I'm inferring that the first alpha release was **v1.26**, even if there have been changes since.

https://kubernetes.io//docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/ is IMO incorrect.

drivers.

When using the DRA helper code, resource driver controller has to implement a
[driver interface](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.1/controller#Driver),
which then can be simply used with
[controller helper instance](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.1/controller#New).

See the [example resource driver controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-controller/main.go#L208) for details.

A resource driver controller's main responsibility is to allocate and deallocate resources for
{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource-claim" text="ResourceClaims">}}.

There are two modes of allocation the ResourceClaim can have:

- `WaitForFirstConsumer` (default), which you could think of as meaning _delayed_.
  In this mode the cluster only requests resource(s)
  for ResourceClaim when a Pod that needs it is being scheduled.
- `Immediate`: the resource has to be allocated to the ResourceClaim as soon as possible, and
  retained until the ResourceClaim is deleted.

> If `allocationMode` is not set explicitly, the mode is `WaitForFirstConsumer`.

Reviewer: I'd move this level of detail into a separate page within https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/node/, and write a shorter text about why PodSchedulingContext and ResourceClaim are used.

Author: While I agree that reference spec of the ResourceClaim object is better placed in `reference/node`, this is supposed to be an article about extending Kubernetes, how to write a resource driver. Implementing a controller part of a resource driver seems to me very much suitable here. We don't bring in the whole info about the ResourceClaim or PodSchedulingContext in here, this is in fact a short summary, only what's important to keep in mind when writing a resource driver.

Author: Okay, so the "extending Kubernetes" is not for writing extensions, but about customizing the instance of Kubernetes, like installation of device plugins and CRDs, and in our case resource drivers. got it.

Author: Minimized the chapter.

See the [example resource driver controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-controller/main.go#L208) for details.

A resource driver controller's main responsibility is to allocate and deallocate resources for
{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource-claim" text="ResourceClaims">}}.

There are two modes of allocation the ResourceClaim can have:

- `WaitForFirstConsumer` (default), which you could think of as meaning _delayed_.
  In this mode the cluster only requests resource(s)
  for ResourceClaim when a Pod that needs it is being scheduled.
- `Immediate`: the resource has to be allocated to the ResourceClaim as soon as possible, and
  retained until the ResourceClaim is deleted.

If `allocationMode` is not set explicitly, the mode is `WaitForFirstConsumer`.

### Delayed allocation

Delayed allocation is done in two steps: first, the scheduler picks up a list of potential Node names
and asks from resource driver controller which of them are unsuitable for ResourceClaims through
_UnsuitableNodes_ call. If no nodes were suitable, scheduler selects another batch of Node names for

> the same call, until suitable node is found.

Author: Fixed.

considers the suitable nodes for the other Pod scheduling constraints (native resources
requests, affinity, selectors, etc.), and picks up exactly one Node name. The resource driver
controller is then asked to allocate resources for the ResourceClaim on the selected node through
_Allocate_ call. All the ResourceClaims referenced by the Pod that match the resource driver name
in the ResourceClass, will be passed as parameters into this call.

If Allocate call returns error for any number of ResourceClaims, the helper code will repeat the
same call with interval until it succeeds.

### Immediate allocation

Immediate allocation does not have selected node, and it is up to the resource driver controller
to select the best suitable node based on the ResourceClaim, ResourceClass and their parameters.
Therefore in this scenario only `Allocate` is called (without `UnsupportedNodes` being called first).

### Common calls for both allocation modes

In both modes the allocation is preceded by getting parameters objects for ResourceClaims and
ResourceClasses to ensure the resource driver is able to get these objects and understand them.

## Sharing resources

> There are two main ways of sharing the resources between Pods:

Author: The resources managed by a resource driver were implied.But I agree.

- by using the same ResourceClaim in multiple Pods
- by allocating the same resource to multiple ResourceClaims

### Shared ResourceClaims

If the `Shareable` field is set to `true` in AllocationResult for ResourceClaim, scheduler will
allow the same ResourceClaim to be used by up to 32 Pods by automatically updating
`Claim.Status.ReservedFor` field without consulting the resource driver that allocated resource
for this ResourceClaim.

This means that the same node resource can be used by multiple applications, which potentially can lead to service degradation and therefore needs to be considered carefully when AllocationResult is

> written.

Reviewer 3: This is not something that the driver or vendor need to decide. The driver just communicates that it's technically feasible to share a claim between pods.

Whether that makes sense is something that the user needs to decide based on the application that they deploy. Just because a claim is sharable does not mean that it automagically will be shared - the application needs to be deployed such that it does this.

Author: Removed last paragraph.

The recommended way of deciding whether the ResourceClaim should be shareable or not, is to
provide a ResourceClaimParameters field which the cluster users can set when they need to share

> the ResourceClaim.

Reviewer 3: Let's remove this section. I don't think that such a field makes sense.

Author: Done.

content_type: concept
weight: 10
---

<!-- overview -->
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.26" state="alpha" >}}

Kubernetes provides a
[Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation)
that can be leveraged to provide more complex hardware resources to workloads with custom resource
accounting.

Similarly to {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="device-plugin" text="Device Plugins">}}, instead of
customizing the code for Kubernetes itself, vendors can implement a resource driver that you deploy
into the cluster to account for and control the allocation of GPUs, high-performance NICs, FPGAs,
InfiniBand adapters, and other similar computing resources that may require vendor specific
initialization and setup.

With device plugins, the scheduler was given a trivial, numerical representation of the resources
available on node for consideration during scheduling as an extended resource.

With DRA, the scheduler is offloading the task of allocating and accounting for non-native resources
to the resource driver, which manages such resources in the cluster.

> Resource driver consists of two main components:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A/The Resource Driver consists of two main components:
```
(not sure about the capitalisation here though)

Author: ```suggestion
A resource driver consists of two main components:
```

> - controller (one per cluster), manages hardware resources allocation for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- a controller (one per cluster), manages hardware resources allocation for
```

  {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource-claim" text="Resource Claims">}}

> - kubelet-plugin (one per node with resource), that:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- a kubelet-plugin per node with access to the resource of interest, that:
```
(not really sure about this one though).

Author: ```suggestion
- a kubelet-plugin per every node, where relevant resource is available, that:
```

  - discovers the supported hardware

>   - announces discovered hardware to the Resource Driver controller

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - announces the discovered hardware to the Resource Driver controller
```

>   - prepares the hardware allocated for Pod when Pod comes to the Kubelet

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - prepares the hardware allocated to a Pod when the Pod comes to the Kubelet
```
not sure about "comes to" in the last part of the sentence.

Author: Strictly speaking, allocation was done to a Resource Claim, but for Pod to make use of them.
Is this suggestion hold with this in mind?

Reviewer 5: Maybe "...when kubelet instantiates the Pod"?  (or "creates")

>   - unprepares the hardware allocated for Pod when Pod has reached final state or is being deleted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - unprepares the hardware allocated for a Pod when the Pod has reached final state or is being deleted.
```

> Communications between controller and kubelet-plugin can be done in two ways:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Communication between the controller and the kubelet-plugin can be realized in two ways:
```

- through Custom Resource Definition objects provided by and designed for the resource driver

> - through ResourceHandle which is a part of AllocationResult provided by the controller in case of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- through a ResourceHandle which is a part of an `AllocationResult` provided by the controller in case of
```

  successful allocation

> General recommendations:

Reviewer 4: Should this be a heading?

Author: Perhaps if / when we get more bullets in it, now seems unnecessary.

> - resource driver name pattern: `<HW type>.resource.<companyname>.<companydomain>`, e.g.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A resource driver name should follow the following pattern: `<HW type>.resource.<companyname>.<companydomain>`, e.g.
```
Is this a "SHOULD" or a "MUST"?

Author: We don't restrict or enforce this anyhow, it's just something that we've agreed between who is involved in DRA at the moment. One can create the driver with complete different pattern name, this is just a suggestion.

Reviewer: However, we (Kubernetes) should document expectations here, especially around the final DNS domain part. What companies do with the part before their company name we mind rather less about.

To me `gpu.resource.example.com` and `fpga.foo.example.net` are fine as examples, as is `expansion-j5.wopr.norad.mil`, but not `cardpunch.ibm-029.some-random-integrator-company`.

Author: Is it the length of the resource-driver name or what in particular is wrong with the last one? IMHO we don't care about the resource-driver name at all, It is almost invisible to users. ResourceClass name is what's referenced in ResourceClaims, not resource driver name. Wasn't main point of this recommendation to prevent conflicts in API object names. If, for example, all GPU vendors would name their resources as `gpu.resource` or `mydevice.gpu` or anything non vendor specific, there would be a chance for name collision.

Reviewer: > If, for example, all GPU vendors would name their resources as gpu.resource or mydevice.gpu or anything non vendor specific, there would be a chance for name collision.

If `cardpunch.ibm-029.some-random-integrator-company` is bad, `some-random-integrator-company.ibm-029.cardpunch` is worse. More chance of collision.

The problem with the last one in my examples is that `some-random-integrator-company` is not a valid DNS name. If we implicitly or tacitly permit these, we're opening end users up to that collision risk.

Even if the implementation code in Kubernetes doesn't check or care, interoperability works better if we strongly recommend that companies use their own actual DNS name as the last part here. That way, when someone does a foolish thing, we can point to our advice and highlight the good practice.
Also, people who want to can write an admission controller that warns on poorly chosen resource driver strings.

Author: > > If, for example, all GPU vendors would name their resources as gpu.resource or mydevice.gpu or anything non vendor specific, there would be a chance for name collision.z
> 
> If `cardpunch.ibm-029.some-random-integrator-company` is bad, `some-random-integrator-company.ibm-029.cardpunch` is worse. More chance of collision.

Yes, that was exactly my point.

> The problem with the last one in my examples is that `some-random-integrator-company` is not a valid DNS name. If we implicitly or tacitly permit these, we're opening end users up to that collision risk.
> 
> Even if the implementation code in Kubernetes doesn't check or care, interoperability works better if we strongly recommend that companies use their own actual DNS name as the last part here. That way, when someone does a foolish thing, we can point to our advice and highlight the good practice. Also, people who want to can write an admission controller that warns on poorly chosen resource driver strings.

We cannot possibly demand actual DNS because we expect resource drivers to be created by community as well as hardware vendors. Resource driver names without actual existing company domain name are inevitable.

In addition there will be drivers that span across hardware vendors. For example, a resource driver that would allocate jointly one piece of hardware F1 from FOO INC with one piece of hardware B1 from BAR INC as a bundle. Such resource driver will need a name too.

Reviewer: Community projects do have domain names. This one has several.

Let's get SIG Architecture to confirm the view here.

  gpu.resource.example.com

<!-- body -->

## Resource driver registration

Controller and kubelet-plugin registration can be handled with the DRA helper code that implements
common for all resource drivers functionality.

### Controller registration

> Resource driver controller has to implement a [driver interface](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.1/controller#Driver), which then can be simply used with [controller helper instance](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.1/controller#New).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Resource driver controller has to implement a [driver interface](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.1/controller#Driver),
which then can be simply used with [controller helper instance](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.1/controller#New).
```

See [example resource driver controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-controller/main.go#L208) for details

### Kubelet-plugin registration

> Resource driver kubelet-plugin has to implement [NodeServer interface](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubelet@v0.28.2/pkg/apis/dra/v1alpha3#NodeServer), which can be simply used with [kubelet-plugin helper instance](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-kubeletplugin/main.go#L160)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Resource driver kubelet-plugin has to implement [NodeServer interface](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubelet@v0.28.2/pkg/apis/dra/v1alpha3#NodeServer),
which can be simply used with [kubelet-plugin helper instance](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-kubeletplugin/main.go#L160).
```

---
title: DRA Resource Drivers
description: Resource drivers provide non-trivial allocation logic and management for devices or resources that require vendor-specific or just complex setup, such as GPUs, NICs, FPGAs, etc.
content_type: concept
weight: 10
---

<!-- overview -->
{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.26" state="alpha" >}}

Kubernetes provides a

> [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation)

Reviewer: This should link to the Kubernetes docs on DRA (which might then mention the KEP as further reading).

Author: @pohly was there such a doc, or is this PR supposed to be it?

Author: Done.

that can be leveraged to provide more complex hardware resources to workloads with custom resource
accounting.

Similarly to {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="device-plugin" text="Device Plugins">}}, instead of

> customizing the code for Kubernetes itself, vendors can implement a resource driver that you deploy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
customizing the code for Kubernetes itself, vendors can implement a _resource driver_ that you deploy
```

which can be simply used with [kubelet-plugin helper instance](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-kubeletplugin/main.go#L160).

## Controller implementation

Controller's main responsibility is to allocate and deallocate resource for
{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource-claim" text="Resource Claim">}}.

There are two modes of allocation the Resource Claim can have:

- `WaitForFirstConsumer` (default), AKA "delayed". In this mode the resource will only be requested
  for Resource Claim when a Pod that needs it is being scheduled.
- "Immediate": the resource has to be allocated to the Resource Claim as soon as possible, and
  retained until the Resource Claim is deleted.

If `allocationMode` is not set explicitly, the mode is `WaitForFirstConsumer`.

### Delayed allocation

Delayed allocation is done in two steps: first, the scheduler picks up a list of Node names and
asks from resource driver controller which of them are unsuitable for Resource Claim through
`UnsuitableNodes` call.

> 

Reviewer 7: It would be nice if this doc could provide more context on what will happens if there is no remain node after the filter plugin. (I'm talking about PostFilter)

Author: Done.

After the resource driver controller reports which of the Nodes are unsuitable, the scheduler
considers the remaining suitable nodes for the other Pod scheduling constraints (native resources
requests, affinity, selectors, etc.), and picks up exactly one Node name. The resource driver

> controller is then asked to allocated the resources for the Resource Claim on the selected node

Reviewer 7: I think it would be helpful for 3rd party developers, if this doc mentions that this Allocate call could be partially successful. And further action In this case, for example, the driver will try allocation at another node or the pod will be remain in thescheduler phase unless few resources get freed then the driver could allocate resources for a pod.

> controller is then asked to allocated the resources for the Resource Claim on the selected node

Reviewer 7: I think it would be helpful for 3rd party developers, if this doc mentions that this Allocate call could be partially successful. And further action In this case, for example, the driver will try allocation at another node or the pod will be remain in thescheduler phase unless few resources get freed then the driver could allocate resources for a pod.

Author: Done.

[Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/)
that can be leveraged to provide more complex hardware resources to workloads with custom resource
accounting.

Similarly to {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="device-plugin" text="Device Plugins">}}, instead of
customizing the code for Kubernetes itself, vendors can implement a _resource driver_ that you deploy
into the cluster to account for and control the allocation of GPUs, high-performance NICs, FPGAs,
InfiniBand adapters, and other similar computing resources that may require vendor specific
initialization and setup.

With device plugins, the scheduler was given a trivial, numerical representation of the resources
available on node for consideration during scheduling as an extended resource.

With DRA, the scheduler is offloading the task of allocating and accounting for non-native resources
to the resource driver, which manages such resources in the cluster.

Resource driver consists of two main components:

- a _controller_ (one per cluster), manages hardware resources allocation for
  {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource-claim" text="ResourceClaims">}}

> - _kubelet-plugin_ (one per node with resource), that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A _kubelet plugin_ (deployed on each node that can access the associated resource), that:
```

Author: Actually, this is relevant too, since the resource doesn't have to be local. I'll combine both phrasings.

Author: Done.

  - discovers the supported hardware

>   - announces the discovered hardware to the Resource Driver controller

Author: If it was `to the controller of the relevant resource driver` - maybe, but not it is ambiguous to which controller it is advertised to.

>   - announces the discovered hardware to the Resource Driver controller

Author: Done.

  - prepares the hardware allocated for Pod when Pod comes to the Kubelet
  - unprepares the hardware allocated for a Pod when the Pod has reached final state or is being deleted.

Communication between the controller and the kubelet-plugin can be realized in two ways:

- through {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CRD">}} objects provided by
  and designed for the resource driver
- through a ResourceHandle which is a part of an `AllocationResult` provided by the controller in case of
  successful allocation

General recommendations:

- resource driver name pattern: `<HW type>.resource.<companyname>.<companydomain>`. For example,
  gpu.resource.example.com

<!-- body -->

## Resource driver registration

> Controller and kubelet-plugin registration can be handled with the DRA _helper code_ that implements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're implementing a controller or a DRA kubelet plugin, you can handle registration using some
DRA _helper code_ (available from the Kubernetes project) that provides functionality that is
```

Author: "some" ? Let's remove "some" ?

common for all resource drivers functionality.

### Controller registration

Resource driver controller has to implement a [driver interface](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.1/controller#Driver),
which then can be simply used with [controller helper instance](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.1/controller#New).

> See [example resource driver controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-controller/main.go#L208) for details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [example resource driver controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-controller/main.go#L208) for details.
```

> ### Kubelet-plugin registration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### kubelet plugin registration
```

Even better: reword both headings in this section to avoid starting the phrase with a component name, so we don't need to use a lowercase “k”.

Author: Done.

> Resource driver kubelet-plugin has to implement [NodeServer interface](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubelet@v0.28.2/pkg/apis/dra/v1alpha3#NodeServer),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you implement a kubelet plugin for a resource driver, you have to to implement the [`NodeServer interface](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubelet@v0.28.2/pkg/apis/dra/v1alpha3#NodeServer),
```

Author: I'll clarify that this is the case only if using the helper code for kubelet-plugin.

Author: Done.

which can be simply used with [kubelet-plugin helper instance](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-kubeletplugin/main.go#L160).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use any programming language, but the examples are all written in Go.

```

## Controller implementation

> Controller's main responsibility is to allocate and deallocate resource for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A resource driver controller's main responsibility is to allocate and deallocate resources for
```

> {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource-claim" text="ResourceClaim">}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource-claim" text="ResourceClaims">}}.
```

There are two modes of allocation the ResourceClaim can have:

> - `WaitForFirstConsumer` (default), AKA "delayed". In this mode the resource will only be requested

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `WaitForFirstConsumer` (default), which you could think of as meaning _delayed_.
  In this mode the cluster only requests resource(s)
```

Author: ```suggestion
- `WaitForFirstConsumer` (default), also known as _delayed allocation_. In this mode the resources are only requested
```

It literally says Wait in the beginning of the name, so it's hard to not think about it as not delayed IMHO. The `AKA "delayed"` meant to signify that many places (slack, KEP, PRs, community meetings) this mode _is_ called delayed, nobody uses the full name of `WaitForFirstConsumer`, "delayed" is a commonly used name for it, not just understanding how it works.

Resource driver is a part of cluster, so the latter sentence should be something else than "... cluster only requeste ...", perhaps `In this mode the resources are only requested` ?

  retained until the ResourceClaim is deleted.

If `allocationMode` is not set explicitly, the mode is `WaitForFirstConsumer`.

### Delayed allocation

Delayed allocation is done in two steps: first, the scheduler picks up a list of potential Node names
and asks from resource driver controller which of them are unsuitable for ResourceClaim through
_UnsuitableNodes_ call. If no nodes were suitable, scheduler selects another batch of Node names for
the same call, until suitable node is found.

After at least one Node is found to be suitable for all ResourceClaims, the scheduler
considers the suitable nodes for the other Pod scheduling constraints (native resources
requests, affinity, selectors, etc.), and picks up exactly one Node name. The resource driver
controller is then asked to allocate resources for the ResourceClaim on the selected node through
_Allocate_ call. All ResourceClaims, that Pod references and that match the resource driver name in
ResourceClass, will be passed as parameters into this call.

If Allocate call returns error for any number of ResourceClaims, the helper code will repeat the
same call with interval until it succeeds.

> ### Immediate Allocation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Immediate allocation
```

    // can be allocated for it (for example, two GPUs requested but
    // the node only has one).
    //
    // The result of the check is in ClaimAllocation.UnsuitableNodes.
    // An error indicates that the entire check must be repeated.
    UnsuitableNodes(ctx context.Context, pod *v1.Pod, claims []*ClaimAllocation, potentialNodes []string) error
```

## Kubelet-plugin implementation

Resource driver's kubelet-plugin's main purpose is to ensure the ResourceClaims, that the Pod will
be using on Node, have all resources ready for Pod to take in use.

```gRPC
    // NodePrepareResources prepares several ResourceClaims
    // for use on the node. If an error is returned, the
    // response is ignored. Failures for individual claims
    // can be reported inside NodePrepareResourcesResponse.
    NodePrepareResources(context.Context, *NodePrepareResourcesRequest) (*NodePrepareResourcesResponse, error)
    // NodeUnprepareResources is the opposite of NodePrepareResources.
    // The same error handling rules apply,
    NodeUnprepareResources(context.Context, *NodeUnprepareResourcesRequest) (*NodeUnprepareResourcesResponse, error)

> ```

Author: There's a link to a KubeCon talk about creating resource driver in the "whatsnext" section.

> ```

Author: Moved to reference section.

### Example {#example-pod}

Suppose a Kubernetes cluster is running a resource driver gpu.resource.example.com with Resource
Class `example.example.com`. Here is an example of a pod requesting this resource to run a demo
workload:

```yaml
apiVersion: gpu.resource.example.com/v1alpha1
kind: GpuClaimParameters
metadata:
  name: single-gpu
spec:

>   count: 1

Reviewer: Optionally, add a comment that this example depends on a fictional CRD.

Author: Done.

---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: gpu-test
spec:
  resourceClassName: gpu.example.com
  parametersRef:
    apiGroup: gpu.resource.example.com/v1alpha1
    kind: GpuClaimParameters
    name: single-gpu
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  namespace: gpu-test4
  name: pod0
  labels:
    app: pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: container1
    image: ubuntu:22.04
    command: ["bash", "-c"]
    args: ["export; sleep 9999"]
    resources:
      claims:
      - name: gpus
  resourceClaims:
  - name: gpus
    source:
      resourceClaimTemplateName: gpu-test
# This Pod wants to use ResourceClaim gpu-test that needs 1 device of ResourceClass

> # gpu.example.com, that is handled by the Resource Driver gpu.resource.example.com .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# gpu.example.com, handled by the gpu.resource.example.com resource driver.
```

#

> # The Resource Driver will allocate the needed resource to ResourceClaim and ensure it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The resource driver allocates the resources required for that ResourceClaim and ensures that these are
```

# ready to use, only then the Pod will start.
```

> ## Resource Driver deployment

Reviewer: GTry:
```suggestion
## Good practice for resource driver deployment {#resource-driver-deploy-tips}
```

The recommended way to deploy a resource driver is a Deployment for controller part and a DaemonSet

> for kubelet-plugin part. It is also possible to deploy it as a package for your node's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the kubelet plugin. It is also possible to deploy it as a package for your node's
```

Author: I'll add "the" and remove "part" manually, kubelet-plugin seems to be spelled with a hyphen everywhere, so I cannot apply this suggestion.

Author: Done.

operating system, or manually.

> Kubelet will be using gRPC interface to interact with Resource Driver's kubelet-plugin. No special
> permissions are required for resource-driver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kubelet uses a gRPC interface to interact with a resource driver's kubelet plugin. On the Kubernetes side,
no special permissions are required for resource drivers.
```

Consider documenting that interface inside https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/node/

> ResourceClass should be part of Resource Driver deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you deploy a resource driver, you typically also define at least one ResourceClass using that driver.
```

Author: Doesn't this seem more like guidance for additional post-installation steps rather than suggestion to include pre-defined ResourceClass into resource driver installation package?

Author: ```suggestion
When creating a resource driver you should include at least one ResourceClass for it in the resource driver deployment package.
```

## API compatibility

Kubernetes Dynamic Resource Allocation support is in alpha. The API may change before stabilization,
in incompatible ways. As a project, Kubernetes recommends that resource driver developers:

* Watch for changes in future releases.
* Support multiple versions of the resource driver API for backward/forward compatibility.

> If you enable the DynamicResourceAllocation feature and run resource driver kubelet-plugin on nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you enable the `DynamicResourceAllocation` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) and run associated kubelet plugins on nodes
```

Author: I'll add a glossary tooltip instead of plain hyperlink.

Reviewer: Please use this particular formulation. We use a hyperlink not tooltips when referring to feature gates - see other docs for examples (docs for beta features will show this better than alpha docs).

Author: True, git grep shows 0 references to tooltip. Alright then.

that need to be upgraded to a Kubernetes release with a newer DRA API version, upgrade your
resource drivers to support both versions before upgrading these nodes. Taking that approach will
ensure the continuous functioning of the device allocations during the upgrade.

## DRA resource driver examples {#examples}

{{% thirdparty-content %}}

Here are some examples of resource driver implementations:

* The [example resource driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver)
* The [Intel GPU resource driver](https://github.com/intel/intel-resource-drivers-for-kubernetes)
* The [NVIDIA GPU resource driver](https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-dra-driver)

## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}

* Learn about [creating your own DRA resource driver](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_fi9asserLE)

> * Discover [example DRA resource driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Discover the [example DRA resource driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver)
```

[kubelet-plugin helper instance](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/151b7c8da2e620c47a3591e1a937f8d0297b0c25/cmd/dra-example-kubeletplugin/main.go#L160).

Resource driver's kubelet-plugin's main purpose is to ensure the ResourceClaims, that the Pod will
be using on Node, have all resources ready for Pod to take in use.

```gRPC
    // NodePrepareResources prepares several ResourceClaims
    // for use on the node. If an error is returned, the
    // response is ignored. Failures for individual claims
    // can be reported inside NodePrepareResourcesResponse.
    NodePrepareResources(context.Context, *NodePrepareResourcesRequest) (*NodePrepareResourcesResponse, error)
    // NodeUnprepareResources is the opposite of NodePrepareResources.
    // The same error handling rules apply,
    NodeUnprepareResources(context.Context, *NodeUnprepareResourcesRequest) (*NodeUnprepareResourcesResponse, error)
```

### Example {#example-pod}

Suppose a Kubernetes cluster is running a resource driver gpu.resource.example.com with Resource
Class `example.example.com`. Here is an example of a pod requesting this resource to run a demo
workload:

```yaml

> # gpu.resource.example.com/v1alpha1 is a CRD of DRA example-driver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# gpu.resource.example.com GpuClaimParameters is an example extension API for parameters
```

- a _controller_ (one per cluster), manages hardware resources allocation for
  {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="resource-claim" text="ResourceClaims">}}
- _kubelet-plugin_ (one per node with resource), that:
  - discovers the supported hardware
  - announces the discovered hardware to the Resource Driver controller
  - prepares the hardware allocated for Pod when Pod comes to the Kubelet
  - unprepares the hardware allocated for a Pod when the Pod has reached final state or is being deleted.

There are two common ways to implement communication between the controller and a kubelet plugin:

- through {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CRD">}} objects provided by
  and designed for the resource driver
- through a ResourceHandle which is a part of an `AllocationResult` provided by the controller in case of
  successful allocation

General recommendations:

- resource driver name pattern: `<HW type>.resource.<companyname>.<companydomain>`. For example,
  gpu.resource.example.com

<!-- body -->

## Resource driver registration

Controller and kubelet-plugin registration can be handled with the DRA _helper code_ that implements

> common for all resource drivers functionality.

Reviewer 5: Drop the second "functionality"?
```suggestion
common for all resource drivers.
```

Author: If we apply the suggestion that makes last "functionality" a second one, I'll remove it. At the moment it is the only one.

There are two modes of allocation the ResourceClaim can have:

- `WaitForFirstConsumer` (default), AKA "delayed". In this mode the resource will only be requested
  for ResourceClaim when a Pod that needs it is being scheduled.
- `Immediate`: the resource has to be allocated to the ResourceClaim as soon as possible, and
  retained until the ResourceClaim is deleted.

If `allocationMode` is not set explicitly, the mode is `WaitForFirstConsumer`.

### Delayed allocation

Delayed allocation is done in two steps: first, the scheduler picks up a list of potential Node names
and asks from resource driver controller which of them are unsuitable for ResourceClaim through
_UnsuitableNodes_ call. If no nodes were suitable, scheduler selects another batch of Node names for
the same call, until suitable node is found.

After at least one Node is found to be suitable for all ResourceClaims, the scheduler
considers the suitable nodes for the other Pod scheduling constraints (native resources
requests, affinity, selectors, etc.), and picks up exactly one Node name. The resource driver
controller is then asked to allocate resources for the ResourceClaim on the selected node through

> _Allocate_ call. All ResourceClaims, that Pod references and that match the resource driver name in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
_Allocate_ call. All the ResourceClaims referenced by the Pod that match the resource driver name in the
```

ResourceClass, will be passed as parameters into this call.

If Allocate call returns error for any number of ResourceClaims, the helper code will repeat the
same call with interval until it succeeds.

### Immediate allocation

Immediate allocation does not have selected node, and it is up to the Resource Driver controller
to select the best suitable node based on the ResourceClaim, ResourceClass and their parameters.

> Therefore in this scenario the `UnsupportedNodes` is not called, but only `Allocate`.

Reviewer 5: I'd put more emphasis on the API that's actually used, than the one that is not:
```suggestion
Therefore in this scenario only `Allocate` is called (without `UnsupportedNodes` being called first).
```
(I had trouble parsing this on first reading as my eyes skipped "not".)

## Common calls for both allocation modes

In both modes the allocation is preceded by getting parameters objects for ResourceClaim and
ResourceClass to ensure the Resource Driver is able to get these objects and understand them.

```gRPC

>     // GetClassParameters gets called to retrieve the parameter object

Reviewer 5: IMHO all these would read better with "is called" instead of "Get... gets called".

Author: This is quote from the code, we don't fix it in here.

Reviewer 3: Our code wasn't reviewed for language the same way as this docs PR now is. We can and should consider the advice we get here and make the same change in code PR.

Author: All right.

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering whether we should link to the [gopkg page](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation@v0.28.3/controller) instead of duplicating the API documentation here.

That API might still change, even from one release to the next. We don't want to continuously update this page just to keep it in sync.

Reviewer: If this is an API that we expect end users and integrators to use, we should document it.

If we don't have capacity to do that, or expect not to, that's fine but that lack of maintenance capacity should be something we consider as part of approving graduation to GA.

Reviewer 3: This is not an API for end users, nor for integrators (= people setting up a cluster?).

We don't mirror the API for client-go here either, do we? This API falls into the same "for developers" category.

Reviewer: Our official client for end users to interact with the Kubernetes HTTP API is `kubectl`, but we do have a page about [client libraries](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/client-libraries/). Of course, you don't need to use `client-go` at all and many people choose not to.

What do we have / will we have for people who are not part of the Kubernetes project and want to write a resource driver?

Author: Moved to reference.

    GetClassParameters(ctx context.Context, class *resourcev1alpha2.ResourceClass) (interface{}, error)

    // GetClaimParameters gets called to retrieve the parameter object
    // referenced by a claim. The content should be validated now if
    // possible. claim.Spec.Parameters may be nil.
    //
    // The caller will wrap the error to include the parameter reference.
    GetClaimParameters(ctx context.Context, claim *resourcev1alpha2.ResourceClaim, class *resourcev1alpha2.ResourceClass, classParameters interface{}) (interface{}, error)

    // Allocate gets called when all same-driver ResourceClaims for Pod are ready
    // to be allocated. The selectedNode is empty for ResourceClaims with immediate
    // allocation, in which case the resource driver decides itself where
    // to allocate. If there is already an on-going allocation, the driver
    // may finish it and ignore the new parameters or abort the on-going
    // allocation and try again with the new parameters.
    //
    // Parameters have been retrieved earlier.
    //
    // Driver must set the result of allocation for every claim in "claims"

>     // parameter items. In case if there was no error encountered and allocation

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    // parameter items. In case there was no error encountered and allocation
```

Author: This is a quote from the code.

Author: Fixed.

    // was successful - claims[i].Allocation field should be set. In case of
    // particular claim allocation fail - respective item's claims[i].Error field

>     // should be set, in this case claims[i].Allocation will be ignored.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    // should be set and claims[i].Allocation will be ignored.
```

Author: This is a quote from the code.

Author: Fixed.

    //
    // If selectedNode is set, the driver must attempt to allocate for that
    // node. If that is not possible, it must return an error. The
    // controller will call UnsuitableNodes and pass the new information to

>     // the scheduler, which then will lead to selecting a different node

Reviewer 5: Reads IMHO better as:
```suggestion
    // the scheduler, which will then lead to selecting a different node
```

Author: This is a quote from the code.

Author: Fixed.

    // if the current one is not suitable.
    //
    // The Claim, ClaimParameters, Class, ClassParameters fields of "claims" parameter
    // items are read-only and must not be modified. This call must be idempotent.
    Allocate(ctx context.Context, claims []*ClaimAllocation, selectedNode string)

    // Deallocate gets called when a ResourceClaim is ready to be
    // freed.
    //
    // The claim is read-only and must not be modified. This call must be
    // idempotent. In particular it must not return an error when the claim
    // is currently not allocated.
    //

>     // Deallocate may get called when a previous allocation got

Reviewer 5: If above "gets" words are changed to "is", then this should also be:
```suggestion
    // Deallocate may be called when a previous allocation is
```

Author: This is a quote from the code.

Author: Fixed.

    // interrupted. Deallocate must then stop any on-going allocation
    // activity and free resources before returning without an error.
    Deallocate(ctx context.Context, claim *resourcev1alpha2.ResourceClaim) error

    // UnsuitableNodes checks all pending claims with delayed allocation
    // for a pod. All claims are ready for allocation by the driver
    // and parameters have been retrieved.
    //
    // The driver may consider each claim in isolation, but it's better

>     // to mark nodes as unsuitable for all claims if it not all claims
>     // can be allocated for it (for example, two GPUs requested but

Reviewer 5: Simpler as:
```suggestion
    // to mark nodes as unsuitable for all claims, if all claims
    // cannot be allocated for it (for example, two GPUs requested but
```

Author: This is a quote from the code.

Author: Fixed.
